
			Five Tips on How to Stop Regretting the Past


What do we mean by Regrets?
Regret is about wishing we could do something different. You will agree with me that experience has shown a lot of regrets in our friendships, at work, and relationships at some point.

It may be that you wish you hadn’t said something horrible to your spouse that has caused a significant conflict, or it could be resentment at the fact that you have quit your job because now you can’t find a new one. Please understand that whatever you regret, there are ways to convey that feeling and ease the burden.

How can you move on from old regrets?
Proceeding from feelings of regret is not something that happens immediately. It can take a while to release something, and everyone will need to move at their own pace based on what they find.

Some of us may live with regrets for the rest of our lives, but there are ways to bring hope and forget about regrets.

The following tips may help you to reduce the burden of the guilt you have in your mind.

1. Be honest about damage caused by your past action:
Please take a closer look at the results you get now and be honest about how bad it is. Perhaps the result of your action or inaction is a financial problem or a health problem, or just a buyer’s regret.
Instead of working on the things you regret, take a moment to think about how ‘bad’ they are, who exactly is likely to be offended, and if they will all be blown away in a few days.
Are these things so bad that you can’t recover from them? Right now it may seem that you have caused an insurmountable problem, but what? Is that true?
Is there any help you can seek or advice you can take that will provide a solution to the problem? Je! Are there steps you can take to improve or at least improve your situation?
Try to push things out of balance. Things may seem bad, but they are probably not as bad as you think.

2. Invite peace in your mind:
Remember that you made the decisions you made at that time either for a reason or for no apparent reason.
It can be painful, but by revisiting your thoughts at the time, you can begin to look for ways to stop these regrets and move forward without resentment or grief.
You may have acted in fear, which is human! It is not fair to blame yourself for a decision you made when you were scared or to feel like you have no other choice. This is normal, and we have all been in this situation before.
Maybe you have made a decision based on how the other person feels. It is normal to feel resentment toward this matter, especially if the other person did not appreciate what you did for them, but it is not healthy to hold this.
Thus, it would help if you found a way to let it go and move on; otherwise, you live with those feelings every day for no reason.

3. Appreciate alternative results:
Would it work if you were to try to reconcile with the past? What would your life look like if you did not quit your job? Would you be promoted now?
These questions evoke feelings of hopelessness, and they can cause us to grieve over a life we have never lived.
Although this emotion can be very intense, one way to move on from them is to focus on what made it happen.
You may not have had sexual relations with your ex, but you may have met someone new – or you may have discovered how much you want to be single.
Maybe things would have been different if you had not quit your job, but you left for a reason, and you are delighted now!
By focusing on the unexpected results you have achieved instead of things you did not get it for, you can start moving forward from a place of gratitude and acceptance. Try to remember that life rarely seems precise what we thought it would be – and that’s fine! Accept the consequences of your decisions and move on.

4. Make adjustments where necessary:
Some of us have made choices that have negatively affected those around us, and we can carry that feeling with us at all times.

It is tiring to feel guilty about something we have said or done, and regrets can lead to other feelings, such as shame, low self-esteem, and worthlessness.

Whatever you do, you can try to fix it – or at least improve the situation – by fixing it by doing the following:

Own the mistakes you made and find a way to correct your errors.
Apologizing for your mistakes may be difficult, and you may need to let go of your pride. Still, such a difficult step will be worthwhile in the possibility of a) rebuilding your relationship and b) not having any regrets about the incident.
Once you finish your options and say sorry and try to fix things, the ball is no longer in your court hence, start welcoming a feeling of relief.

That feeling of relief, healing the wound, and doing all you can to heal can really ease the pain of regret and guilt.

5. Remove the Blames:
Who is responsible for the actions you regret?
Who else has been affected by such actions?
If there is a particular person involved, try to fix it with them.
But if you are the one who is blaming you, you need to find a way to get rid of the blame and set yourself free.
That means making peace with your past decisions and acknowledging that you are the only person affected by them.